website/integrations: add omada controller doc (#14523)
goauthentik/authentik: website/integrations/services/omada-controller/index.mdx

3. Click **Submit** to save the new application and provider.

### Create an application entitlement

An application entitlement is used to control privileged access to the Omada Controller.

1. Log in to authentik as an admin, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Applications**, and click on the **Application entitlements** tab.
3. Click **Create entitlement**, and provide the following required configurations:
    - **Name**: provide a suitable name for the application entitlement.
    - **Attributes**: TEMP

### Download the metadata file

1. Log into authentik as an admin, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click on the name of the newly created Omada Controller provider.
3. Under **Metadata** click the **Download** button. This metadata file will be required in the next section.

## Omada Controller configuration

1. Log in to the Omada Controller.
2. Navigate to **Global View** > **Settings** > **SAML SSO**, then click **Add New SAML Connection**.
3. Set **Identity Provider Name** to `authentik`.

> 4. For **Configuration Method** select `Metadata File`, and upload the metadata file you downloaded from authentik.

Reviewer: With option "Metadata File" or with "Metadata-URL" I get an error that the metadata cannot be parsed.
With the manual option the Entity-ID must be an URL but authentik does not provide its entityID in URL-format.

I think this not a bug in authentik but authentik could additionally provide its entityID in URL-Format.

    - **Friendly Name**: Leave blank
    - **Expression**:

    ```python
    return request.user.name.split(" ", 1)[-1]
    ```

4. Click **Finish**, followed by **Create**. Create another **SAML Provider Property Mapping** with the following settings:

    - **Name**: `usergroup_name`
    - **SAML Attribute Name**: `usergroup_name`
    - **Friendly Name**: Leave blank
    - **Expression**:

    ```python
    for group in user.ak_groups.all():
        yield group.name
    ```

5. Click **Finish**, followed by **Create**. Create another **SAML Provider Property Mapping** with the following settings:

    - **Name**: `username`
    - **SAML Attribute Name**: `username`
    - **Friendly Name**: Leave blank
    - **Expression**:

    ```python
    return request.user.username
    ```

6. Click **Finish**

### Create a group in authentik

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Directory** > **Groups** and click **Create**.
3. Set a name for the group (e.g. `omada-admins`) and click **Create**.
4. Click the name of the newly created group and navigate to the **Users** tab.

> 5. Click **Add existing user**, select the user that needs Planka administrator access and click **Add**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Click **Add existing user**, select the user who requires Omada Controller administrator access, and click **Add**.
```

fixed the app name too

Reviewer 2: who vs that, might need confirmation by @tanberry

### Create an application and provider in authentik

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** and click **Create with Provider** to create an application and provider pair. (Alternatively you can first create a provider separately, then create the application and connect it with the provider.)

    - **Application**: provide a descriptive name, an optional group for the type of application, the policy engine mode, and optional UI settings.
        - Note the application slug, it will be required when filling out the **Identity provider SSO URL** later on. TEMP
    - **Choose a Provider type**: select **SAML Provider** as the provider type.
    - **Configure the Provider**: provide a name (or accept the auto-provided name), the authorization flow to use for this provider, and the following required configurations.

>         - For Cloud Controller, set the **ACS URL** to `https://aps1-omada-account.tplinkcloud.com/sso/saml/login/`. For Software and Hardware Controllers, set the **ACS URL** as the IP Address and port of your controller followed by `/sso/saml/login` (e.g `https://<controller_ip>:8043/sso/saml/login`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - **ACS URL**:
        	- For Cloud Controllers: `https://aps1-omada-account.tplinkcloud.com/sso/saml/login/`
        	- For Software/Hardware Controllers: `https://<controller_ip>:8043/sso/saml/login`
```

could controller also be a fqdn? Also, since it's only mentioned once or twice it's not that important, but shouldn't it also get added to the preparation section?

Reviewer: For Software Controller: The port number is not necessary when it is behind a reverse proxy.

>         - For Cloud Controller, set the **Entity ID** to `https://omada.tplinkcloud.com/`. For Software and Hardware Controllers, set the **Entity ID** as the IP Address and port of your Controller (e.g `https://<controller_ip>:8043`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - **Entity ID**:
        	- For Cloud Controller: `https://omada.tplinkcloud.com/`
        	- For Software/Hardware Controllers: `https://<controller_ip>:8043`
```

        - Set the **Service Provider Binding** to `Post`.
        - Under **Advanced protocol settings**:
            - Set an available signing certificate.

>             - Set **NameID Property Mapping** to 'authentik default SAML Mapping: UPN'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            - Set **NameID Property Mapping** to `authentik default SAML Mapping: UPN`
```

            - Under **Property mappings**:
                - Select only the following **User Property Mappings**:
                    - `authentik default SAML Mapping: Email`
                    - `authentik default SAML Mapping: Name`
                    - `authentik default SAML Mapping: UPN`
                    - `givenname`
                    - `surname`
                    - `usergroup_name`
                    - `username`
    - **Configure Bindings** _(optional)_: you can create a [binding](/docs/add-secure-apps/flows-stages/bindings/) (policy, group, or user) to manage the listing and access to applications on a user's **My applications** page.

3. Click **Submit** to save the new application and provider.

### Copy the metadata URL

1. Log into authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click on the name of the newly created Omada Controller provider.

> 3. Under **Metadata** click the **Copy Download URL** button. This metadata URL will be required in the next section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Under **Metadata**, click **Copy Download URL**. You will need this metadata URL for the next section.
```

## Omada Controller configuration

> 1. Log in to the Omada Controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Log in to the [Omada Controller](https://omada.tplinkcloud.com/).
```

Reviewer: The URL is specific to the Cloud Controller. The URL is different when it is a Software or Hardware Controller.

> 2. Navigate to **Global View** > **Settings** > **SAML SSO**, then click **Add New SAML Connection**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Navigate to **Global View** > **Settings** > **SAML SSO**, then select **Add New SAML Connection**.
```

> 3. Set **Identity Provider Name** to `authentik`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Enter `authentik` as the **Identity Provider Name**.
```

> 4. For **Configuration Method** select `Metadata URL`, and paste the metadata URL you copied from authentik.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Choose `Metadata URL` for **Configuration Method**, then paste the metadata URL you copied from authentik.
```

> 5. Click **Load Info** followed by **Send**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Click **Load Info**, then click **Send**.
```

> 6. In the **Actions** column, click on the **Details** button of the newly created authentik SAML connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. In the **Actions** column, find the new authentik SAML connection and click its **Details** button.
```

I don't like what I wrote at all.

> 7. Take note of the **Entity ID**, **Omada ID**, **Resource ID**, and click **OK**. These values will be required in the next section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Take note of the **Entity ID**, **Omada ID**, and **Resource ID**, then click **OK**. You will need these values in the next section.
```

> 8. At the top right of the page, click **Go To SAML Role**, followed by **Add New SAML Role**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. At the top right of the page, select **Go To SAML Role**, then click **Add New SAML Role**.
```

Whichever you prefer

> 9. Set the desired **SAML Role Name**, **Role**, **User Type**, and **Privileges** for the new SAML role. The **SAML Role Name** must match the name of the previously created authentik group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. Set the **SAML Role Name**, **Role**, **User Type**, and Privileges for the new role. Make sure the **SAML Role Name** matches the authentik group name created earlier.
```

did we want to give any more detail to guide the user?

Author: They're drop down selections in the UI so it's relatively simple. I don't think it requires further explanation.

> 10. Click **Create**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. Click **Create**.
```

## Encoding default relay state

> The default relay state is derived by encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID** with a Base64 encryption tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default RelayState is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).
```

> This can be done via the following command on Linux:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can generate this value using one of the following methods:

### On Linux and macOS
```

    ```bash

>     echo -n '<Resource_ID>_<Omada_ID>' | base64

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    echo -n '<Resource_ID>_<Omada_ID>' | base64 --wrap=0
```

to avoid line breaks in the output

    ```

> Or via the following powershell command on Windows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### On Windows (PowerShell):
```

    ```powershell

>     [Convert]::ToBase64String([System.Text.Encoding]::Unicode.GetBytes('<Resource_ID>_<Omada_ID>'))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    [Convert]::ToBase64String([System.Text.Encoding]::UTF8.GetBytes('<Resource_ID>_<Omada_ID>'))
```

since PowerShell uses .net’s encoding classes, Encoding.Unicode represents utf-16le encoding, not utf-8. I would assume Omada expects UTF-8 encoded input + it makes the output consistent with what osx and linux generate. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.text.encoding.unicode?view=net-9.0

    ```

:::note

> The underscore between both values is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The underscore between the two values is required for proper parsing.
```

:::

## Reconfigure authentik provider

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.

> 2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click the **Edit** icon of the newly created Omada Controller provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click the **Edit** icon next to the newly created Omada Controller provider.
```

3. Set **Issuer** to the **Entity ID** value from Omada Controller.

> 4. Under **Advanced protocol settings**, set **Default relay state** to the encoded value from the previous section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Under **Advanced protocol settings**, enter the encoded value from the previous section into **Default relay state**.
```

> 5. Click **Update**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Click **Update** to save your changes.
```

"to save your changes" feels redundant, but we do this at some places as well, so eh

## Configuration verification

> To verify that authentik is correctly integrated with Omada Controller, first log out of Omada Controller. Log in to authentik and click on the Omada Controller application in the application dashboard. You should then be redirected to the Omada Controller dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To verify that authentik is correctly integrated with Omada Controller, log out of Omada Controller, then log in to authentik, click on the Omada Controller application in the application dashboard, and you should be redirected to the Omada Controller dashboard.
```

Reviewer 2: Oh and we can't log in via omada instead of passing by authentik?

---

## What is Omada Controller

> Omada Controller is a software platform used to centrally manage and monitor Omada networking devices like access points, switches, and routers. It provides a single interface for configuring, managing, and monitoring these devices, offering centralized control over your entire Omada network.
>
> -- https://www.omadanetworks.com/

## Preparation

The following placeholders are used in this guide:

- `authentik.company` is the FQDN of the authentik installation.

:::note
This documentation lists only the settings that you need to change from their default values. Be aware that any changes other than those explicitly mentioned in this guide could cause issues accessing your application.
:::

## authentik configuration

To support the integration of Omada Controller with authentik, you need to create property mappings, a group, and an application/provider pair in authentik.

### Create property mappings in authentik

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Customization** > **Property Mappings**, click **Create**, select **SAML Provider Property Mappings**, and click **Next**.

> 3. Configure the first mapping for the user's given name:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Configure the first mapping for the user's given name (first name):
```

    - **Name**: `givenname`
    - **SAML Attribute Name**: `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/givenname`
    - **Friendly Name**: Leave blank
    - **Expression**:

    ```python
    return request.user.name.split(" ", 1)[0]
    ```

4. Click **Finish** to save. Then, repeat the process to create a mapping for the user's surname:

    - **Name**: `surname`
    - **SAML Attribute Name**: `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/surname`
    - **Friendly Name**: Leave blank
    - **Expression**:

    ```python
    return request.user.name.split(" ", 1)[-1]
    ```

> 5. Click **Finish** to save. Then, repeat the process to create a mapping for the user's group memberships:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Click **Finish** to save. Then, repeat the process to create a mapping for the user's *group memberships*:
```

    - **Name**: `usergroup_name`
    - **SAML Attribute Name**: `usergroup_name`
    - **Friendly Name**: Leave blank
    - **Expression**:

    ```python
    for group in user.ak_groups.all():
        yield group.name
    ```

> 6. Click **Finish** to save. Finally, repeat the process to create a mapping for the user's username:

Reviewer 3: Can we provide any guidance or parms around what their username can or cannot be? Can they use their first name? An email address?

### Create an application and provider in authentik

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** and click **Create with Provider** to create an application and provider pair. (Alternatively you can first create a provider separately, then create the application and connect it with the provider.)

    - **Application**: provide a descriptive name, an optional group for the type of application, the policy engine mode, and optional UI settings.
        - Note the application slug, it will be required when filling out the **Identity provider SSO URL** later on.
    - **Choose a Provider type**: select **SAML Provider** as the provider type.
    - **Configure the Provider**: provide a name (or accept the auto-provided name), the authorization flow to use for this provider, and the following required configurations.
        - **ACS URL**:
            - For Cloud Controllers: `https://aps1-omada-account.tplinkcloud.com/sso/saml/login/`
            - For Software/Hardware Controllers: `https://<controller_ip_address>:8043/sso/saml/login`

>         - **Entity ID**:

Reviewer: That should be **Issuer**

                    - `authentik default SAML Mapping: Email`
                    - `authentik default SAML Mapping: Name`
                    - `authentik default SAML Mapping: UPN`
                    - `givenname`
                    - `surname`
                    - `usergroup_name`
                    - `username`
    - **Configure Bindings** _(optional)_: you can create a [binding](/docs/add-secure-apps/flows-stages/bindings/) (policy, group, or user) to manage the listing and access to applications on a user's **My applications** page.

3. Click **Submit** to save the new application and provider.

### Copy the metadata URL

1. Log into authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.
2. Navigate to **Applications** > **Providers** and click on the name of the newly created Omada Controller provider.
3. Under **Metadata**, click the **Copy Download URL**. This metadata URL will be required in the next section.

## Omada Controller configuration

1. Log in to the Omada Controller.
2. Navigate to **Global View** > **Settings** > **SAML SSO**, then click **Add New SAML Connection**.
3. Set **Identity Provider Name** to `authentik`.

> 4. Select `Metadata URL` as the **Configuration Method**, then paste the metadata URL you copied from authentik.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Select `Metadata URL` as the **Configuration Method**, then paste the metadata URL that you copied from authentik.
```

> 5. Click **Load Info**, then click **Send**.

Reviewer 3: My editors always trained me to say "..., and then do xyz....", using the phrase "and then". We could make a team decision to not to do and just say "then" but I do think that "and then" is better for people for whom English is not a first language, and for translators.

Author: I prefer "and then", so I've restored them throughout the doc

6. In the **Actions** column, click on the **Details** button next to the newly created authentik SAML connection.
7. Take note of the **Entity ID**, **Omada ID**, **Resource ID**, then click **OK**. These values will be required in the next section.
8. At the top right of the page, click **Go To SAML Role**, then **Add New SAML Role**.
9. Set the desired **SAML Role Name**, **Role**, **User Type**, and **Privileges** for the new SAML role. The **SAML Role Name** must match the name of the previously created authentik group.
10. Click **Create**.

## Encoding default relay state

> The default relay state is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

Reviewer 2: the 
> combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

is 

> Base64-encoding

which gives you the

> The default relay state

> The default relay state is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

Reviewer 2: I find taking the sentence backwards like that can help

> The default relay state is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

Author: We could change this to "The default relay state is generated by encoding in Base64 a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`)". But I personally like the sound of "Base64-encoding".

> The default relay state is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

Reviewer: The most important thing to me is to understand correctly: We need to do a base64 **en**coding and not a base64 **de**coding  of **Resource ID_Omada ID**.

> The default relay state is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

Reviewer 2: Dewi, well shouldn't it be "encoding, in Base64 format,..."

> The default relay state is generated by Base64-encoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID**, separated by an underscore (`_`).

Reviewer 2: both work, whatever you prefer

> You can generate this value using one of the following methods:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can generate the relay state value using one of the following methods:
```

> ### On Linux and macOS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Linux and macOS
```

    ```bash
    echo -n '<Resource_ID>_<Omada_ID>' | base64 --wrap=0
    ```

> ### On Windows (PowerShell):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Windows (PowerShell):
```

    ```powershell
    [Convert]::ToBase64String([System.Text.Encoding]::UTF8.GetBytes('<Resource_ID>_<Omada_ID>'))
    ```

> :::

Reviewer 2: A power shell command which accomplishes the same task as the previous command for osx and linux

3. Under **Metadata** click the **Download** button. This metadata file will be required in the next section.

## Omada Controller configuration

1. Log in to the Omada Controller.
2. Navigate to **Global View** > **Settings** > **SAML SSO**, then click **Add New SAML Connection**.
3. Set **Identity Provider Name** to `authentik`.
4. For **Configuration Method** select `Metadata File`, and upload the metadata file you downloaded from authentik.
5. Click **Send**.
6. In the **Actions** column, click on the **Details** button.
7. Take note of the **Entity ID**, **Omada ID**, **Resource ID**, and click **OK**. These values will be required in the next section.
8. At the top right of the page, click **Go To SAML Role**, followed by **Add New SAML Role**.
9. Set the desired **SAML Role Name**, **Role**, and **Privileges** for the new SAML role. Click TEMP

## Decoding default relay state

The default relay state is derived by decoding a combination of the **Resource ID** and **Omada ID** with a Base64 encryption tool. This section provides an example of how to do this.

1. Go to https://www.base64decode.org/

> 2. In the **Decode from Base64 format** section, enter: `<Resouce ID>_<Omada ID>`.

Reviewer: +r
Resource ID
